---
title: "Roles and Responsibilities"
description: "Using the concepts of Boundaries and Areas of Responsibility to think about how teams work together."
created: "2025-01-11T09:54:57.397Z"
pubDate: "2025-01-11T09:54:57.397Z"
author: "Śūnya"
image:
    src: "./headers/tree-lines.png"
    alt: "A river bank bordered by a wall of trees"
    aspectRatio: "16:9"
    width: 3968
    height: 2240
tags: ["programming", "architecture"]
---

One of the great things about having a simple paradigm is that it allows you to think about things in a different way and thereby come to understand them more deeply. Due to my neurological makeup I lean into these methodologies and outlooks (to a fault), and I have to remember to balance them with the understanding that these types of "filters" inherently simplify and remove information. In other words, not mistaking the rationalisation with reality itself (nodding to the "underground man"). Indeed, I find I can actually gain more profound understanding by the process of evaluating my insights against the real world! In this article, I'll be looking at the concepts of [Boundaries and Areas of Responsibility](/blithering/responsibilitiesandboundaries) and using it to help reason about how teams work together.

## A nice little story

This story sets the scene so that we can examine an organisation and team dynamic using these concepts.

There is a group of volunteers working in some woodland, thinning trees (removing some trees to provide better growing conditions for those remaining). The access has been cleared ahead of time and the group arrive with the communal tools, ready to get to the task.

James, has recently joined the group and is eager to prove his capability. He grabs a saw and pushes through the undergrowth to the nearest tree marked for thinning. He saws away at the trunk of the tree, which binds the saw blade. Seeing he cannot cut the tree down that way, he decides to  cut off a big branch, which comes loose and promptly gets stuck in the branches of the trees around. So he climbs up the tree and starts chopping at the side branches and eventually the branch crashes to the ground. James smiles at a job well done, and start sawing at another big branch... Now Jay, a group veteran, wanders over and decides to give James the benefit of their wisdom. Jay knows that not only is there a more efficient way to approach this work, it will be much less dangerous too. They show James how to start with the small side branches, how to segment the main branch so that it comes down in manageable pieces and how to pile up the logs so the workspace is clear of clutter.

Jenny is the group organiser. She sees the neat piles of logs made by James and Jay around their tree and the work they are doing in the tree. She sees that they are dropping branches very close to where people are passing by; a nice pile of logs, but not where they ultimately need to be. So she puts up some barriers to guide pedestrians and clears a path through the brambles to the main log piles. Jenny has planned these works in concert with the landowners, marked the trees & cleared the access in preparation for the work. She's made sure the tools are available and working, there is sufficient transport and teas & coffees for the task itself. She is also cognisant of the work that needs to happen next.

This story illustrates the concepts we will be exploring by modelling approaches to a problem and how they naturally modify with knowledge.

In the story James is our team's most junior worker, whose scope of thought is very much limited to the immediate task - cut the tree down, bit by bit; he lacks the experience to be able to plan beyond attacking the problem and seeing what happens.

Jay is more experienced, and can perceive more fully the breadth of the problem and can therefore plan how to approach it more reasonably, while avoiding some of the pitfalls but fundamentally the scope of their problem is pretty much to the same size as James', albeit with more perspective. They will achieve a neat solution, efficiently, but may not have a sense of how the solution fits into the wider picture.

Jenny is a senior, who has been present at all the client meetings, prepared the ground and architecture of the work, understands the final goals and the ambit of each of the parts, as well as where this will put everyone once it is done. She creates the situation to enable each of the tasks to occur as fluidly as possible and guides them in the appropriate direction. Her view of the problem is much wider and more coherent, allowing her to understand all of the parts, how they work together and where the danger points lie, thereby being prepared. She does not necessarily concern herself with the details unless it is called for.

## Boundaries and Areas of Responsibility

As noted in ["Unlocking simplicity"](/blithering/responsibilitiesandboundaries), "Boundaries" are the edges of a system, where it interacts with other systems. They control ingress and egress of information to the area they bound. "Areas of Responsibility" (AoR) are the nested "concerns" of the system, whose only interest is what lies within the Boundary. This means that the "Areas of Responsibility" within the boundary are free to operate without interference from the outside world, which is an important concept in, for example, software development.

To illustrate these concepts within our story, this group of volunteers can be likened to a piece of software, and we can think of the different people's Roles as a function within it. For simplicity, we only have 2 different Roles ("Area of Responsibility"), the volunteer and the organiser. As our story describes it, the volunteers are essentially unaware of anything beyond what the organiser tells them - like a good function - they act according to the information they have (input) and do the task described by their role (output).

At least, that would be one way of understanding the story. It is a compelling model, because it provides a lot of certainty - a business endeavour, for example, wants to be able to operate with as much certainty as possible; equally a team of people want to be able to work together reliably - so there is pressure to think and behave like this.

### Reality check

While it is not unreasonable to think of the Roles themselves in this way, for example, we can expect a chef to cook a meal, a driver to drive a car, a developer to write code, nevertheless, if we compare the same meal produced by 3 different chefs, it can vary dramatically depending on the chef. That is to say, depending on the person in the Role. This is because the person is not contained by the Boundaries of Role, rather they can be said to contain the Role, along with a lot of other "stuff". Consequently, the context of the Role is changed by the person who assumes it.

We can see this in our story; James and Jay approach the problem of clearing trees in different ways, even though they have the same Roles. Each brings different experience and knowledge to the task, but equally we need to consider the person in the Role; e.g. perhaps James is feeling out of place as the new person, so he is trying to show willing by proving himself. In which case, were he to have had less to prove, perhaps he'd have thought about it a bit, or asked some advice before jumping in. This reality check shows that, given one understanding, and then reconsidering it in context, allows us to make further insights, and even mitigate potential problems. While it is tempting to think about the easily defined Role, instead of all the other "stuff", it doesn't reflect reality.

If we accept that a person assumes a Role, then we can think about the person and the Role as overlapping concerns. While a Role might have static definitions, that is not so true of a person. Nevertheless, people also have Boundaries. However their shape, intentionality, permeability, negotiability and rigour will be different from person to person, situation to situation, even moment to moment. Furthermore, a person will have multiple, conflicting Boundaries. This is notable because, as mentioned in ["Unlocking simplicity"](/blithering/responsibilitiesandboundaries), Boundaries create a cost or friction when crossing them. In people, it can be the person whose Boundary is impacted that pays the cost, particularly where the Boundary is not deliberately raised. As an example of what this is like, consider how you feel when a salesperson calls you at 8pm, just as you're settling down. Or imagine if a stranger asks to borrow your phone... and to demonstrate how these Boundaries change, now imagine the same things with someone you love - an entirely different cost because the nature of the Boundary changes with the context.

So it is interesting that, when a person assumes a role, they also effectively assume the Boundaries and Responsibilities prescribed by that role, which will therefore be subject to the same tides as all the other personal Boundaries of that person. In our story, although Jay's intention was to help James, they effectively cross a number of his boundaries by offering help without being asked. Depending on James' Boundaries, he could have reacted many ways; from being grateful for the help, to being offended that Jay was "patronising" him, or even being angry at Jay for belittling him. We couldn't predict these responses from the role definition alone, but, accepting that we are dealing with human beings and their Boundaries, we can take the insights from these observations about Boundaries, and entirely mitigate the problem by changing the context of the Boundary to affect the Boundary conditions. We could change the role definition to make the Boundary aligned with easing this conflict - so that paired work is the norm for example. The change in the context and nature of the Boundary changes its cost, which is a really powerful insight in dealing with conflicts like this. As an aside, paired work in this case, and indeed in developing software is considerably safer and more reliable, so it is a worthwhile consideration.

## Outside the box

Another consideration within the scope of Boundaries is that people actually have aspirations and the capacity to learn and grow. Companies need this. Indeed, one could say that the real responsibility of a "junior" developer is to learn and become "not junior". If a person grows too big for a Role or Boundary, either the Role must change, or they will change Roles. People will tend to become unhappy if they are not growing, and this is a cost to the company. Therefore, facilitating the process is an obvious win for all. Furthermore, our story points to something else that is hinted at above; people come to our teams with a whole bunch of "stuff". James is very inexperienced in the volunteer work, but for all we know, he might be a rocket engineer in his day job. This shows us, once again, that there is limited value to apply labels to people, and all the more reason to provide opportunities for people to bring their full potential to their work, by providing those means.

In regards a company of people (as distinct from a business concern), diversity is an amazing and healthy thing. It engenders a culture that allows for creativity, evolution and adaptability. It is a source of strength. Consequently, a company should strive to nurture diversity by reducing friction at Boundaries (while respecting people's personal Boundaries). Whether by design or by accident, the AoRs and Boundaries of a company can either support or suppress this diversity. It is worth considering how the AoRs and Boundaries of a company can be adjusted to support this diversity, and thereby the growth and health of the company and the people comprise it.

### Hierarchies

Having noted that being aware of Boundaries, and how they impact people and work, allows us to reduce friction where it counts. Equally, noting that they might hide a great deal of valuable experience and expertise, so, finding ways for people to not be contained by the Boundaries of the Role can be a great fulfillment for everyone. That notwithstanding, there is another observation that applies very directly to these concepts; that they describe hierarchies.

Companies are often composed of roles, e.g. a Chief of Technology might be responsible for a number of teams, each of which have a tech lead, who are responsible for a team, etc. Functionally, this allows different people to focus on specific concerns, without having to be an expert at all things, but it also represents a power dynamic. The power might be inherent in the structure - where a "boss" has influence over things like a person's salary, etc - but, equally, it might be more subtle modes of control - e.g. where are person controls information or opportunity. This can be really pernicious for a company's growth because it might be impacting people and teams' ability to grow and bring their full potential to bear. It is sad to say that humans don't have a great track record of using power wisely, so it is always good to pay attention to power differentials and how they are used. An example of this in our story, is Jenny, who is at the top of the power chain. She's done her job well; she has agreed with her client what they will be doing, she has a plan, and she knows what will happen next. In other words, she has all the information and context (power) for what is happening. More importantly, she controls the information she provides James and Jay, and thereby imposes limitations on the scope of their Responsibilities. This is not necessarily a bad thing, in that it allows them to focus their efforts, but it certainly can be. Consider, if Jenny had let James and Jay know where the logs needed ultimately to be, perhaps they could have adjusted their behaviour to be more in line with the overall goal. Indeed, if Jenny had provided contextual information outside the needs of their immediate role, they might have been able to provide alternative solutions! This is a simple example, but it is easy to see how this could be a problem in a company, where the power dynamic is much more pronounced.

## In conclusion

The concepts of Boundaries and Areas of Responsibility are a powerful tool for understanding how teams work together, and how companies can be structured. They provide a way to think about how information flows, how power is distributed and how people can be supported to bring their full potential to their work. They are not without their pitfalls, however, and it is important to remember that they are a simplification of reality. Consequently, it behoves us to apply these insights mindfully, and to actively evaluate them against the real world in order to gain the most insight and to avoid the pitfalls that come with simplification.
